---
date: '2012-09-22'
excerpt: >-
  A personal exploration of afterlife beliefs through psychology and spirituality, examining Jesse Bering's research while embracing soul-based faith over religious doctrine.
slug: is-there-an-afterlife
title: Is there an afterlife?
---

This is the question. I know it is a heavy and sensitive topic to discuss in a blog post. I only want to write a few of my fleeting thoughts as they pertain to my previous post "Dreams, poems and soul connection". In that post, I wrote that at the right time and place, I may find a psychology book that discusses the question "is there a life after death?".
The right time and place were decided a few days ago by my baby, who discovered the bookshelf. With the excitement of researching a new corner in the house, he took two books out of the shelf. One of them was a book on [Computational Complexity](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0201530821/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0201530821&linkCode=as2&tag=flyingthought-20), which is my husband's. I instantly put it back. The other one was Jesse Bering's "[The God Instinct, The Psychology of Souls, Destiny, and the Meaning of Life](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1857885600/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1857885600&linkCode=as2&tag=flyingthought-20)". I kept it and left it on the table in the living room to read it, whenever my small dictator would allow me.
When I was pregnant, I had already read the first two chapters after which, I put it back in the bookshelf. I was too emotional to continue reading it. I was provoked by Jesse Bering's statements that revolved around the main point that God is merely an illusion of our modern minds. Now, when my baby chose it from among the other books on the bookshelf, I decided to continue reading it. This time, I emptied my mind of personal beliefs and read it with genuine interest to pick Jesse Bering's mind on the topic. Here and there, I found it funny and page by page, I found it very rich in scientific information about the human mind.
I was excited to find the question on afterlife, being discussed from the perspective of a psychological scientist. In the world of a psychological scientist, the main question is not whether there is a life after death but why do human beings, like myself, raise this question. A simple and short answer is that we have the desire to believe that death is not the end. Why do we have such a desire? Here, researchers in psychology have different theories. Social psychologists argue that human beings have a fear of death, hence the belief in afterlife. Yet, other researchers found no correlation between fear of death and belief in the afterlife.
Other researchers who are supporters of the evolution of the theory of mind, such as Jesse Bering, argue that we don't have the ability to imagine ourselves into a life, where sensations and mental experiences lack altogether. In other words, ever since human beings existed, we have had problems grasping the idea that our minds are mortal. Therefore, we choose to believe that life and death are two great mysteries.
By the time I finished reading the book, I liked it tremendously. I liked that it is replete with psychological research findings. On the one hand, I liked that Jesse Bering challenged maybe the most heartfelt belief that we have, that is the belief in the existence of God. It is a proof that our societies have indeed evolved. On the other hand, Jesse Bering focused on the mind, which my gut feeling tells that it may not offer the answer to whether or not there is an afterlife or a God. In my subjective reality, the mind is hindering the ability to come closer to The truth of life and death.
I don't believe in any religion. Religions have done nothing but manipulating human beings by others who wanted the power. Religions have done nothing but preventing people from setting their minds and souls free.
I believe partly in science, which provides intellectual satisfaction to understand something of the surrounding world. Yet, I made up my mind. My soul believes that there is a God, or a Being, the way Eckhart Tolle calls God in "[The Power of Now](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B002361MLA/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B002361MLA&linkCode=as2&tag=flyingthought-20)", the "ever-present One Life beyond the myriad forms of life that are subject to birth and death." I choose to free myself from my mind and embrace the enlightenment. I choose to find my "true nature beyond name and form".
Is there an afterlife? In the light of my spiritual experiences, I say that there is. We shall find out The truth at the end of the road. Till then, let's enjoy the journey the best we can, shall we?