---
date: '2012-12-22'
excerpt: I love poetry and romance books.
slug: how-faithfully-do-words-reflect-our-emotions
title: How Faithfully Do Words Reflect Our Emotions?
---

I love poetry and romance books. One verse in a poem or one sentence in a book would touch me deeply and would keep me company for days, sometimes weeks. When I started writing poems, it took only a few minutes to write a poem down. The process of creation has always been a mystery to me. For example, I would sit in a bus when I felt there was a poem in me waiting to be written. The next thing was to look for a piece of paper and a pen in my bag. Yet, I realised that as much as I love words, they fail to express the intensity of the feelings bubbling deep inside.To my mind, especially words like love, joy or grievance are weak indications of the state of being of Love, Joy or Grievance. I remember when I met a friend after her father had passed away. I wanted to say something to show that I genuinely sympathised for her loss. Despite all my effort to come up with an empathic sentence, I quickly said the official "Condolences" to her. I knew there was no word invented which could comfort her a tiny bit. Being by her side in silence was the best thing I could do.Someone told me, "A good poet or writer will always find words to express feelings." This may be the case, but not all of us are born poets or writers. Common people feel the urge to communicate strong feelings too.I was reading Eckhart Tolle's book, "[A New Earth](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0452289963/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=flyingthought-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0452289963)", when I realised that when feeling pure Love, Joy, or Grievance, the most important is to focus on those states of being without assigning any words to them. Those are the rare moments when we truly live - when the mind is quiet and the inner state is "talking".Saying "I love you" maybe not need to be said too often. When Love and Joy are felt at the deepest level of our being, they emanate an energy which is felt by the persons whom we truly love.I will always be in love with words, especially the ones positively charged, and I am aware how important words are in communication (this blog post is one example). Still, in my opinion, our subjective inner lives are by far much richer. Hence, before hurrying up to express how we feel, it is worthwhile to listen in silence to what we feel.
